Were those all faculty couples?
Not entirely, but most of them were, yeah.
And what was your impression of the climate in Texas?
Well, it's the same as it is today.
It's variable.
It was the second year we were here, we had 72 inches of rain, and I've seen
six inches of snow and I've seen 115 degrees.
What was your impression of the president of Texas A&M at the time you arrived?
I loved him.
I thought he was a great person.
And we used to have
faculty meetings in the spring in Guyon Hall, which is another non-existent building.
I remember when somebody got up and was grousing about something and he told them Highway 6 runs both ways.
I thought whoever it was, and I have a suspicion who it was.
Right.
Now you got here at about the time some of those great changes were about to happen at A&M.
Yeah.
What was the faculty's attitude as far as you knew about those changes at A&M?
Well, it depended on who they were.
A lot of the A&M had a lot of Aggies on the faculty, and a number of them were very much against the change.
Most of the people who were from other places were in favor of the change.
If we had had a vote in the Department of Oceanography, what would the vote have been, probably?
Oh, it would have been...
Almost entirely?
I mean, almost unanimously?
I would guess, close to.
Well, you said integration, but also co-education and non-compulsory cohort.
During those early, those first years here, where did you all do your shopping?
At Safeway, I think.
Okay.
Downtown, down at the mall?
Redmond Terrace was a big shopping area.
If you wanted hardware, you went to Central Texas Hardware in downtown Bryan, which is then and probably would still be the best hardware store in the country.
I remember I bought my wife a chainsaw for her birthday.
People in the hardware store never forgot that.
All right.
Back in your own career, how many years were you here before you joined the administration?
The second year I was here, George Cruz had asked me to come over to graduate college as part-time assistant dean.
And how in the world he got my name or got me lined up, I'll never know.
His daughter and my daughter were friends.
Okay.
But that was no reason for him to pick me as the assistant dean.
Was there an interview?
Yeah, he interviewed me.
Do you remember what?
He just sat and talked.
Nothing very specific, except he and I had the same views on how things ought to work, and they weren't working that way at the time.
How did there come to be a vacancy that he needed to fill?
You were quitting, I think.
Yeah, I was going back to the history department because I had decided I didn't want to be a full-time administrator.
So you became a real full-time administrator.
Later.
Well, anyway, the interesting thing was Dr. Wayne Hall was academic vice president and dean of the graduate college, both.
And then Kunze came in as dean.
Dr. Hall's executive secretary continued to run everything.
And then Dr. Hall went to Bennington, New York, his president up there, and Horace Byers, who had been our dean in geosciences, came over as academic vice president.
and the girls in the office wanted to wear slacks and mrs watson would never let him wear slack now that's doris watson describe her and personality and all i describe her best as a 20-year bosun she
ran everything with an iron fist, and she had the power.
Anything she said, Dr. Hall would agree with it.
And she was very well organized.
Yeah.
She kept track of everything, and she did everything.
But the interesting part was Dean Kunze went to Dr. Byers and said,
Some of the girls in the office would like to wear slacks because when they get up on stools to get files or bend over to get files, they feel more comfortable in slacks.
Dr. Meyers said, fine.
And so one day, a couple of the girls came in slacks, and Mrs. Watson came in glued, of course.
And they said, well, do you consider
The girls, they could wear slacks.
And Dr. Byers looked her in the eye and said, well, after all, he's the dean.
And I think she retired two weeks later.
She'd lost her power base.
And the same thing happened in First Presbyterian Church.
Describe Byers and Kunze and the way they went about their task.
Well, Byers just let Coonsey go as near as I could tell.
George would go and check with him on things once in a while.
But the Graduate College had been sort of run out of the hip pocket for so long that Coonsey decided that we needed to get things established.
with the help of the Graduate Council and others.
He began to rewrite the catalog, put things down so that there would never be a question of whether it was A or B.
It was either A or B.
Now, y'all were located physically where?
We were in the Koch Building to start with.
And what else was in the Koch building at that time?
The first floor was all fiscal offices.
No, it was fiscal office and registrar.
And the second floor was the academic vice president and the graduate college.
And I think Clark Diebel's office was up there, too.
And the President was over in the System Building, as we called it then?
No, the President was up there too.
Was he up there?
No, no, he was in the Systems Building, yeah.
Mr.
Rudder was in the Systems Building.
It's interesting, to give you an idea of what kind of a guy he was, he was in California visiting his brother who had cancer.
And Joe's father and uncle were taking care of Mr. Rutter's brother.
And Joe's dad- Joe- Your wife.
Oh, oh, oh.
Your wife.
Joe's dad tried to get him to check into the hospital out there.
He said he's a sick man.
But he wouldn't do it.
He had to get back to A&M to take care of things.
But as soon as he got back, he called my wife to tell her what nice people her uncle and father were.
And I think he had his circuitry collapse about two weeks later after he got back.
Really?
It was a very short time.
So Joe's dad was right.
As far as you remember, what was Rutter's administrative style regarding academic matters?
Where did academic decisions originate?
I can't honestly answer that, Haskell.
Do you remember him ever meddling?
No.
Not with our department.
Well, and wasn't the academic vice president in charge of academics?
That's the answer I'm assuming.
I assume Wayne Hall was, but I'm not sure.
I never got into that.
All right, then let's do Coonsey.
What were the duties of the graduate college then?
Well, they were in charge of admissions.
of graduate students, degree programs.
Did the central graduate dean and his staff, did they actually decide who was admitted, or did the departments?
It was sort of a mixture.
The departments recommended, but the graduate office made the decision.
Do you remember any instances where there was a disagreement?
I remember a lot of instances where there were disagreements.
What were the usual causes of the disagreement?
primarily one department.
And they wanted to admit foreign students who didn't know any English.
They didn't care whether they knew English.
They could stand over against the lab bench and let them do research.
Who was that?
Chemistry.
At the time you first joined the graduate administration, which programs here at A&M, to which programs would you give the highest marks for their quality of their graduate programs?
Well, chemistry again would be one of the high ones.
Okay.
Who else?
Hard to live with, but physics was pretty good.
Tell me about history.
Not then.
It used to seem to be a reasonably good local program.
Yeah, but it wasn't a national program then.
Oh, no.
There weren't very many national programs here.
The vet school was well thought of nationally, but they had the palm rings so inbred that
They got into all kinds of problems due to that, I think.
As far as you know, how did chemistry and economics get identified as two graduate programs to get special attention?
Economics, that's another one I hadn't thought of.
Who persuaded Rutter to?
I have no idea.
I don't either.
As a matter of fact, I'm not sure Rutter is the one
The reason I know that it was a little bit before him is that, who was the longtime department head?
Martel?
No, in economics.
Oh, economics.
Comparatively short, very conservative.
He came from Florida State.
He's retired up in Dallas now.
The only two people I know
doing economics with phil graham and tom saving right it's it was the department head that hired them rutter gave a long lecture to him about not getting any liberals and he didn't need to preach that to that department head mill greenhut
Oh, Mel Greenhut, yeah.
Because Mel Greenhut was very much a conservative.
I didn't realize Mel was a department head.
Do you know who brought, did Mr.
Rudder, who brought Martell?
Who found him?
I have no idea.
I would suspect it was probably.
Byers maybe?
Now when you went to work in the graduate college office, was Wayne Hall still there?
Yes.
Describe his personality and his style of doing things.
Near as I could tell, he let Mrs. Watson do most of it.
But he was sort of a soft-spoken person who really didn't do a lot of administration, pushing things, as near as I could tell.
I may be wrong, but I wasn't around him very long.
I've learned in some of the material I've gathered that he deserves very, very high praise in persuading Rutter that those changes, which Rutter would later come to campaign for, Rutter at first was worried that he couldn't make them work.
You mean women?
Women and non-compulsory corps and integration and higher admission requirements.
Hall persuaded him that we had to do it.
It's interesting.
A&M had a full-time corps requirement, but the guy who was in charge of the aquarium at Scripps Institution went to A&M and was not in the corps.
He wore a uniform and he had a shoulder patch that said non-reg.
And he was a folk singer and he wrote a bestseller about the atomic bomb and McCarthy put him on his blacklist.
Oh, as being a communist sympathizer.
But he was an A&M graduate.
I'm not sure he graduated, but he did attend.
Oh, okay.
My, my.
His name was Sam Hinton.
Hinton?
Hinton.
Sam Hinton.
H-I-N-T-O-N. Sam Hinton.
Describe Dean George Coonsey.
Make believe that I never knew him.
Tell me all you know about him.
George is a very conservative person who
wants everything in writing, so to speak.
When he first became graduate dean, he put out graduate college memoranda
detailing changes in the catalog requirements and clarifying catalog requirements.
He put out so many they became known as Kunze games.
A fellow in aeronautical engineering was wandering across campus one night and he fell into a ditch that
construction people that dug.
And the only way he found his way out was to make a torch out of a graduate college memoranda and hook it up and find his way out at Bob Wick.
Bob Wick?
Actually he broke his back when he fell in there.
Oh my.
And it's amazing that he was able to get out.
Describe George Coonsey by personality.
I'd say George was an outgoing person really, easy to get to know and very friendly, unless you were pushing him the wrong way and then he could dig his heels in and be as contrary as anything.
I think he did a very good job of selling the graduate college to the university.
What do you think, when he, in his early years as dean, what do you think his goals were for A&M's graduate programs?
wanted to have a superior graduate program period.
I don't think he had any other than the graduate program per se.
I don't think he had anything he pushed.
Did he have any favorites and any blind spots?
I don't think so.
And Safer George, he did everything in an even-handed way.
Soil crop science, where he came from, got treated just like everybody else.
And I think that was one of the real strengths of the graduate colleges.
We really made an attempt not to play favorites.
Now, you all were, I mean, you all managed the graduate admissions.
How did you all watch over graduate college standards, quality?
Well, Coonsey, we had an awful time doing it.
We used to post grades by hand on all the degree programs.
And as the graduate program began to grow, it was just physically impossible to do that without a tremendous staff.
which some colleges decided to do.
But Kunze decided the way to go was with computers very early in the game.
And he developed a graduate college program, which actually became the standard for most of the graduate colleges in the United States.
And with that, he could
get the grades on there and get a complete printout for each student at the end of every semester.
We operated the graduate college with a staff that was about, I'd say about a fifth of what the University of Texas was doing.
And when you began there were doctoral programs in agriculture, engineering, geoscience, veterinary medicine, but that's about it, wasn't it?
That was about it.
And we worked with the departments and the colleges
and the coordinating board getting graduate degrees.
When you were beginning in your early years, did you all still review thesis and dissertation proposals and appoint the graduate council representatives to doctoral committees?
Yeah.
We did that.
But we didn't review the dissertations.
That was the committee's problem.
But we approved the committees and the proposals.
And then we also had a thesis and dissertation clerk who checked for style.
style and format, nothing more.
When you were beginning those duties, did Dean Coonsey give you any guidelines, advice, things to do or not to do?
In appointing?
No, no, no, in your duties as to what he expected of you.
Did he tell you some things he wanted you to do or not to do?
No.
You just said you wanted good science.
What was your typical day's routine as the associate dean of the graduate school?
Can we stop?
Sure.
When you were beginning as the associate dean of the graduate school, what was your typical routine?
What time did you get there?
What was a typical day's?
activities and so forth?
I'd usually try to get there at 7 in the morning if at all possible and no later than 730.
And you parked?
I parked right outside the door, really.
In that little lot just south of the Koch building?
Yeah.
What kind of car were you driving then?
I had an ancient BMW.
I parked right next to Robert Smith.
But I would try to get there that early because I could accomplish about a day's work in that hour.
Then during the day I spent most of the time on the phone.
I'd come home to lunch or go out with somebody.
And I'd go back and spend the rest of the time on the phone.
By the clock, usually it began to quiet down a little bit.
And I would work till 6 and get that other hour when I was in the phone business.
And that was pretty much the routine.
Now, we were still having Saturday classes.
Did you go to the office on Saturday mornings?
No.
I would go to the office on Saturday or even Sunday if there was some reason to, if somebody wanted something or if I was behind in my work.
Do you remember any emergency matters that you had to take care of in some unusual hour, night or day?
I got called one night to
I was still part-time oceanography and I think I was a police officer.
Somebody called me and said there was a truckload of TNT at Goodwin Hall and they wondered where to put it.
So I told them to call the department head.
I think he told them where to put it, as a matter of fact.
But I think it was supposed to go out to the annex where there was an ammunition revetment.
In those days, we used TNT to do sonic work.
Now, describe your duties as compared to those of Dean George Coonsey.
Well, I worked with degree programs and dissertation and thesis proposals in the colleges of science, geoscience, veterinary medicine.
George didn't do much of that.
He did policy things.
I honestly don't know a lot of what George did, but he didn't have time to do degree programs and that sort of thing.
Did you bring much work home in your briefcase at night?
I'd sneak some home once in a while, yeah.
But generally your seven till six long day?
Yeah.
I once in a while I'd bring stuff home.
George discouraged us from doing that because the files on the student are pretty confidential.
And that was another thing with the computer.
We worried about people getting into the files and seeing.
I remember somebody got fired for getting into the files, but I can't remember any of the particulars.
All right, now you started in 1960, what year, at the graduate school?
Let's see, I came here in 65, probably 67.
Okay.
Do you remember when you heard that Mr. Rutter was ill?
Do you remember anything about his illness and death?
The only thing I remember is his death.
And what was the campus reaction?
It was pretty much like the day Kennedy got shot, is my feeling.
Were you or others aware that he was ill?
I wasn't.
I'm sure others were.
I don't think many people were, though.
And then Ludeke became the interim president.
Did that change the graduate college's work at all?
No.
And Byers was still the vice president for academic affairs.
What about when Dr. Williams came?
Do you remember any first impressions of him?
Yeah.
Most of them negative.
Oh, really?
Yeah, I never could identify with Williams for some reason.
It just, I don't know what it was.
But he appointed Calhoun as academic vice president.